What is an atom? | The smallest part of an element that can exist. All substances are made up of atoms.
What is the typical atomic radius? | In the order of 10^-10 m
What makes up an atom? | A positively charged nucleus surrounded by negatively charged electrons
What is the atomic nucleus? | Positively charged object composed of protons and neutrons at the centre of every atom with one or more electrons orbiting it
What is the atomic number? | The number of protons in the nucleus
Who developed the Bohr model of the atom? | Bohr developed it as a modification of Rutherford's model, proposing that electrons exist in shells of fixed energy around the nucleus
What is a chemical change? | Requires a chemical reaction where the products have a different chemical composition to the reactants
What is a compound? | A substance made up of two or more types of atoms chemically combined together
Who developed the early atomic model describing atoms as solid spheres? | Dalton
What did Dalton state about atoms? | Atoms of an element were identical and atoms could not be divided
What is an electron? | Negatively charged subatomic particle which orbits the nucleus at various energy levels, with very small relative mass (negligible)
What is an element? | A substance made up of only one type of atom
What are the characteristics of the gas state of matter? | Particles have the most energy, are relatively spread out, and move randomly in all directions
Who carried out the gold foil experiment? | Geiger and Marsden carried out the experiment designed by Rutherford
What were the results of the gold foil experiment? | Most alpha particles passed straight through the foil, but the deflected particles were deflected much more than expected
What conclusion did Rutherford draw from the gold foil experiment? | It led him to develop the nuclear atomic model
What is an ion? | An atom or molecule with an electric charge due to the loss or gain of electrons
What are isotopes? | Atoms of the same element with the same number of protons but a different number of neutrons
What are the characteristics of the liquid state of matter? | Particles are arranged randomly and close together, able to move past each other
What is the mass number? | The total number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus of an atom
What is a neutron? | Neutral subatomic particle present in the nucleus of the atom with a relative mass of 1
What is the particle model? | Models the three states of matter by representing particles as small solid spheres, helping explain melting, boiling, freezing and condensing
What is a physical change? | Requires energy and involves a change in state; the form changes but chemical composition remains the same
What is a proton? | Positively charged subatomic particle present in the nucleus of the atom with a relative mass of 1
Who designed the gold foil experiment? | Rutherford designed it, though it was carried out by Geiger and Marsden
What is the nuclear atomic model proposed by Rutherford? | Atoms are made up of a small positively charged nucleus surrounded by mostly empty space and a layer of orbiting electrons
What are the characteristics of the solid state of matter? | Particles hold a regular arrangement and have the least amount of energy
What are subatomic particles? | Particles smaller than an atom - protons, neutrons and electrons are the three most common
Who developed the plum pudding atomic model? | Thomson
What did Thomson's plum pudding model propose? | The atom was a positively charged sphere with small negatively charged electrons dotted through it
How did Thomson disprove Dalton's idea that atoms couldn't be split? | He used a cathode ray tube to prove that there are small particles inside atoms