What is formed at the cathode during electrolysis using inert electrodes? | Metals (or hydrogen) are formed at the cathode
What is formed at the anode during electrolysis using inert electrodes? | Non-metals are formed at the anode
Which direction do positive ions (cations) move during electrolysis? | Positive ions move to the negative electrode (cathode)
What happens to positive ions at the cathode? | They receive electrons and are reduced
Which direction do negative ions (anions) move during electrolysis? | Negative ions move to the positive electrode (anode)
What happens to negative ions at the anode? | They lose electrons and are oxidized
How do you predict the products of electrolysis of binary ionic compounds in the molten state? | Identify the ions in the compound, + ions go to cathode, - ions go to anode
What does OIL RIG stand for in electrolysis? | Oxidation Is Loss (of electrons) and Reduction Is Gain (of electrons)
What happens at the anode during electrolysis? | Loss of electrons, oxidation occurs, anions come to it (positive electrode)
What happens at the cathode during electrolysis? | Gain of electrons, reduction occurs, cations come to it (negative electrode)
When electrolyzing an aqueous solution, what competes with the metal ions at the cathode? | Hydrogen ions (H+) from water compete with metal ions
What determines whether hydrogen or a metal is produced at the cathode in aqueous solution? | If the metal is less reactive than hydrogen, the metal will be produced; otherwise hydrogen is produced
When electrolyzing an aqueous solution, what competes with non-metal ions at the anode? | Hydroxide ions (OH-) from water compete with non-metal ions
What determines whether oxygen or a halogen is produced at the anode in aqueous solution? | If halide ions (Cl-, Br-, I-) are present, the halogen will be produced; otherwise oxygen is produced
What are the products of electrolysis of sodium chloride solution? | Hydrogen gas at cathode, chlorine gas at anode
Why is hydrogen produced at the cathode during electrolysis of sodium chloride solution? | Because sodium is more reactive than hydrogen
Why is chlorine produced at the anode during electrolysis of sodium chloride solution? | Because chloride ions are halide ions
What are the products of electrolysis of copper sulfate solution? | Copper metal at cathode, oxygen gas at anode
Why is copper produced at the cathode during electrolysis of copper sulfate solution? | Because copper is less reactive than hydrogen
Why is oxygen produced at the anode during electrolysis of copper sulfate solution? | Because sulfate ions are not halide ions
Why are inert electrodes used in electrolysis? | To prevent reactions between the electrodes and the solution when products are reactive
When might non-inert electrodes be used in electrolysis? | In processes like purification of copper, where pure and impure copper electrodes are used