What is activation energy? | The minimum amount of energy that particles must collide with to react.
What is actual yield? (Higher Tier) | The mass of product obtained from a reaction. It's normally less than theoretical yield due to incomplete reactions, side reactions and loss of product.
What is atom economy? (Higher Tier) | The measure of the amount of starting materials that end up as useful products.
What is a by-product? (Higher Tier) | A secondary product made in the reaction of something else.
What is a catalyst? | A substance that increases the rate of reaction by providing a different reaction pathway with a lower activation energy. They are not used up during the reaction.
What is a closed system? | A system in which nothing can get in and nothing can get out. A reversible reaction will eventually reach equilibrium in a closed system.
What is dynamic equilibrium? | When a reversible reaction reaches a state where the rate of the forward reaction equals the rate of the backward reaction. The concentration of reactants and products remains constant.
How does increasing concentration affect equilibrium? | If reactant concentration increases, more products will be formed until equilibrium is reached again. If product concentration decreases, more reactants will react until equilibrium is reached again.
How does concentration affect reaction rate? | Increasing concentration means reacting particles are closer together. They collide more often, leading to more successful collisions and a faster reaction rate.
How does pressure affect equilibrium? | Increasing pressure shifts equilibrium towards the side with fewer moles of gas. Decreasing pressure shifts equilibrium towards the side with more moles of gas.
How does pressure affect reaction rate? | Increasing pressure of gaseous reactants brings particles closer together. They collide more often, leading to more successful collisions and a faster reaction rate.
How does surface area affect reaction rate? | Increasing surface area exposes more reacting particles (greater surface area to volume ratio). This leads to more frequent successful collisions and increases reaction rate.
How does temperature affect equilibrium? | Increasing temperature shifts equilibrium towards the endothermic reaction. Decreasing temperature shifts equilibrium towards the exothermic reaction.
How does temperature affect reaction rate? | Higher temperature gives particles more kinetic energy so they move faster. They collide more often and more particles have the activation energy needed to react.
What are enzymes? | Biological catalysts which speed up biochemical reactions so that organisms can survive.
What is Le Chatelier's principle? | If a reaction at equilibrium is subjected to a change in concentration, temperature or pressure, the position of equilibrium will move to counteract the change.
What is molar volume? | The volume occupied by one mole of gaseous molecules.
What is the molar volume at RTP? | 24 dm³ - the volume occupied by one mole of molecules of any gas at room temperature and pressure.
What is percentage yield? (Higher Tier) | The percentage ratio of the actual yield of product from a reaction compared with the theoretical yield.
What is rate of reaction? | The measure of the amount of product formed or reactant used over time. Units may be g/s, cm³/s or mol/s.
What is a reaction profile? | A diagram used to show the relative energies of reactants and products, the activation energy and the overall energy change of a reaction.
What is a reversible reaction? | A reaction in which the products can react together to reform the reactants. Shown by the symbol ⇌.
What is a standard solution? (Higher Tier) | A solution containing a known concentration of a substance.
What is theoretical yield? (Higher Tier) | The maximum possible mass of product that can be obtained from a reaction.
What is titration? (Higher Tier) | A technique used where a solution of known concentration is used to determine the concentration of an unknown solution.