What are reversible reactions? | Chemical reactions where the products can react to produce the original reactants again.
How can the direction of a reversible reaction be changed? | By changing the reaction conditions.
What is dynamic equilibrium? | When the rates of forward and reverse reactions are equal in a closed system.
When does equilibrium occur in a reversible reaction? | When the reactions occur at exactly the same rate in each direction.
What determines the relative amounts of substances at equilibrium? | The conditions of the reaction.
What is Le Chatelier's Principle? | If a system at equilibrium has a change made to any condition, the system responds to counteract the change.
What happens when concentration of reactants is increased? | Position of equilibrium shifts towards products (right) so more product is produced.
What happens when concentration of products is increased? | Position of equilibrium shifts towards reactants (left) so more reactant is produced.
How does increasing pressure affect gaseous reactions? | It favours the reaction that produces the least number of molecules.
If a reaction produces more moles on the product side, what happens when pressure increases? | Yield decreases - equilibrium shifts left.
If a reaction produces fewer moles on the product side, what happens when pressure increases? | Yield increases - equilibrium shifts right.
If a reaction produces more moles on the product side, what happens when pressure decreases? | Yield increases - equilibrium shifts right.
If a reaction produces fewer moles on the product side, what happens when pressure decreases? | Yield decreases - equilibrium shifts left.
What happens when temperature is increased? | Equilibrium moves in the direction of the endothermic reaction.
What happens when temperature is decreased? | Equilibrium moves in the direction of the exothermic reaction.
For an exothermic forward reaction, what happens to yield when temperature increases? | Yield decreases - equilibrium moves left.
For an exothermic forward reaction, what happens to yield when temperature decreases? | Yield increases - equilibrium moves right.
For an endothermic forward reaction, what happens to yield when temperature increases? | Yield increases - equilibrium moves right.
For an endothermic forward reaction, what happens to yield when temperature decreases? | Yield decreases - equilibrium moves left.
What symbol is used to show a reversible reaction? | ⇌ (double arrow)
Give an example of a reversible reaction. | The Haber Process: nitrogen + hydrogen ⇌ ammonia
What does "closed system" mean in terms of equilibrium? | A system where no substances can enter or leave during the reaction.