What is selective breeding (artificial selection)? | Selecting individuals with desirable characteristics and breeding them together over many successive generations.
Why must selective breeding be repeated for many generations? | Not all offspring will show desired characteristics, so only those with desired traits are selected and bred together repeatedly.
How does artificial selection differ from natural selection in terms of which individuals mate? | In natural selection, selection pressures prevent certain individuals from mating (dead, sick, unable to compete). In artificial selection, humans segregate individuals allowed to mate.
What happens to livestock not selected for breeding in artificial selection? | They face early slaughter, while the mating population are kept alive and well looked after.
Give three examples of characteristics animals are selectively bred for. | Cows/goats/sheep for milk or meat production, chickens for large eggs, domestic dogs for gentle nature.
What animal are all domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) descended from? | Wolves.
Give four characteristics that plants are selectively bred for. | Disease resistance, increased crop yield, hardiness to weather conditions (drought tolerance), better tasting fruits.
Name three vegetables that have been selectively bred from wild brassica. | Cauliflower, cabbage, broccoli (also Brussels sprouts, kale, kohlrabi).
What is inbreeding? | When only the 'best' animals or plants (which are closely related to each other) are bred together.
What is a gene pool? | The number of different alleles (versions of genes) in a population.
What are two risks of inbreeding due to reduced gene pool? | Organisms inheriting harmful genetic defects and organisms being vulnerable to new diseases.
What is genetic engineering? | A process which involves modifying the genome of an organism to introduce desirable characteristics.
What does genetic engineering involve doing with genes? | Taking genes from one organism and placing them into the cells of another organism (another species).
What is an organism called that has received genetic material from another organism? | Genetically modified (GM) or transgenic organism.
What is recombinant DNA? | DNA of an organism that contains DNA from another organism as well.
How has bacteria been genetically modified to help diabetics? | The gene for human insulin has been inserted into bacteria, which produce human insulin that can be collected and purified for medical use.
How have crops been genetically modified to resist insect pests? | A gene from a bacterium that produces a poison that kills insects has been inserted, making them resistant to insect pests like caterpillars.
What is 'golden rice' and why was it created? | Rice genetically modified to produce a chemical that turns into vitamin A in the human body, helping prevent vitamin A deficiency.
Give two benefits of genetic engineering of food products. | Improvement of crop yields and making crops more nutritious to fight deficiency diseases.
Give three risks of genetic engineering of food products. | Possible spread of genes to wild plants (creating superweeds), unknown effects on human health, religious and ethical concerns about tampering with nature.
How can genetic engineering reduce biodiversity? | Fewer plant species are used when herbicides are applied, which can impact insects and insect-eating birds.
[Higher Tier] What are restriction enzymes used for in genetic engineering? | To isolate the required gene, leaving it with 'sticky ends' (a short section of unpaired bases).
[Higher Tier] What is a vector in genetic engineering? | A plasmid used to introduce new DNA into a host (plasmids are circles of DNA found inside bacterial cells).
[Higher Tier] Why are sticky ends important in genetic engineering? | They allow the plasmid and isolated gene to be joined together because they have corresponding/matching sequences.
[Higher Tier] What enzyme is used to join the plasmid and isolated gene together? | DNA ligase enzyme.
[Higher Tier] When will DNA ligase link two pieces of DNA together? | When two pieces of DNA have matching sticky ends (because they have been cut by the same restriction enzyme).
[Higher Tier] Why is an antibiotic resistance gene used as a marker in genetic modification? | It is linked to the new gene with a desirable trait, allowing scientists to select the insertion point of the new gene.
[Higher Tier] What happens when genetically engineered bacteria reproduce? | The plasmids are copied as well, so the recombinant plasmid quickly spreads as bacteria multiply and they all express the gene.
[Higher Tier] Why are genetically engineered bacteria placed in a fermenter? | To reproduce quickly in controlled conditions and make large quantities of the human protein.
What percentage of the world's arable land is now under GM crops? | Just over 10% of the world's arable land.
Give one advantage of GM crops regarding chemical use. | Reduced use of chemicals such as herbicides and pesticides - better for the environment, cheaper and less time-consuming for farmers.
Give one advantage of GM crops regarding crop yields. | Increased yields from crops as they are not competing with weeds for resources or suffering from pest damage.
Give one disadvantage of GM crops regarding cost. | Increased costs of seeds - companies charge more to cover development costs, meaning smaller, poorer farmers cannot compete with larger farms.
Give one disadvantage of GM crops regarding chemical dependency. | Increased dependency on certain chemicals (herbicides that crops are resistant to), often made by the same companies that produce the seed.
What is a risk of inserted genes being transferred to wild plants? | Genes could be transferred by pollination, which could reduce usefulness of the GM crop (e.g., if weeds gain the herbicide resistance gene).
How can GM crops affect biodiversity? | Reduced biodiversity as there are fewer plant species when herbicides have been used, impacting insects and insect-eating birds.
What has some research shown about the growth of GM plants? | Plants that have had genes inserted into them do not grow as well as non-GM plants.
Why must biotechnological solutions increase agricultural productivity? | More people plus less available land means that agricultural productivity must rise.