What is agribusiness? | Intensive farming aimed at maximizing the amount of food produced
What is a carbon footprint? | Measurement of greenhouse gases individuals produce through burning fossil fuels
What does development mean in geography? | The progress of a country in terms of economic growth, use of technology and human welfare
What is energy conservation? | Reducing energy consumption by using less energy and existing sources more efficiently
What is an energy mix? | The range of energy sources of a region or country, both renewable and non-renewable
What is energy security? | Uninterrupted availability of energy sources at an affordable price
What are food miles? | The distance covered supplying food to consumers
What are fossil fuels? | Natural fuels like coal or gas, formed in the geological past from remains of living organisms
What is fracking? | Process of extracting gas from shale by injecting high-pressure fluids to fracture rock and release gas
What is grey water? | Recycled domestic waste water
What does import mean? | Goods and services bought by residents of a country from another country
What is organic produce? | Food produced without the use of chemicals such as fertilizers and pesticides
What is renewable energy? | A resource that cannot be exhausted, e.g. wind, solar and tidal energy
What are resources? | A stock or supply of something that has value or a purpose
What is resource management? | Control and monitoring of resources so that they don't become exhausted
What is undernourishment? | Food intake below that needed to sustain a healthy life
What is undernutrition? | When people don't eat enough nutrients to cover their needs for energy, growth, or maintaining a healthy immune system
What is water deficit? | When demand for water is greater than supply
What is water quality? | Measured in terms of the chemical, physical and biological content of water
What is water stress? | When demand for water exceeds supply in a certain period, or when poor quality restricts its use
What is water surplus? | When the supply of water is greater than demand for water
What is water transfer? | Matching supply with demand by moving water from an area with water surplus to another area with water deficit