What is biodiversity? | A large variety of animal and plant life living in the same ecosystem.
What are buttress roots? | Large, thick tree roots that grow above the ground in tropical rainforests.
What is camouflage? | An animal adaptation where animals purposefully look like their surroundings to hide from predators.
What is the canopy? | The layer of a tropical rainforest where the tops of trees touch, forming a dense area of vegetation.
What is a carbon sink? | Something that absorbs more carbon dioxide than it emits, causing a net loss of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
What is cattle ranching? | The rearing of cows on large areas of land, usually to produce meat to sell for a profit.
What is clear felling? | A form of logging where all trees in an area are cut down.
What is commercial farming? | Agriculture that is intended to create surplus produce to sell for a profit.
What are debt-for-nature swaps? | Agreements where one country reduces the amount of debt owed by another country in return for the owing country putting efforts into environmental conservation.
What are decomposers? | Organisms that break down organic material and release the nutrients back into the ecosystem.
What is deforestation? | The permanent (and usually large-scale) removal of trees.
What is a drip-tip? | An adaptation of a leaf where the end is tapered, allowing rainwater to drip off.
What is ecotourism? | Tourism that aims to have reduced environmental impact and supports conservation efforts, making it sustainable.
What are epiphytes? | Plants that live on the surface of other plants, receiving nutrients from these plants.
What is hydroelectric power? | Energy harnessed from the movement of water.
What is interdependence? | The concept of multiple things depending on each other for survival.
What is latosol? | An iron-rich, infertile soil found in tropical rainforests.
What is leaching? | A process in soils where minerals are washed away by water (usually rainfall).
What are lianas? | Woody vines found in tropical rainforests; their roots grow on the forest floor, but the vines stretch high into the canopy.
What is logging? | The process of cutting down trees for wood.
What is nutrient cycling? | The movement of nutrients between organic and inorganic components of an ecosystem.
What are plantations? | Farms where crops are grown in large amounts with the intention to sell for a profit.
What is selective logging? | A form of logging where only certain trees are cut down to reduce the environmental effects of logging.
What is subsistence farming? | Agriculture that is intended to produce only enough food for the farmer and their family to eat.
What is transmigration? | A government scheme that aims to move people from overpopulated urban areas to underpopulated rural areas.
What is a tropical rainforest? | A warm, wet, biodiverse ecosystem located within the Tropics.
What is the understory? | The layer of a tropical rainforest that lies beneath the canopy but above the forest floor.