What is a natural hazard? | A naturally occurring event that is a threat to a population.
What is hazard risk? | The probability that a natural hazard will negatively affect a population.
What is a tectonic hazard? | A natural hazard caused by the physical processes and movements of tectonic plates.
What are tectonic plates? | Large slabs of the Earth's crust that sit and move on top of the liquid mantle.
What is the mantle? | The area underneath the crust which contains magma.
What is magma? | Molten rock found beneath the Earth's surface.
What is continental crust? | The thicker, less dense crust that makes up the continents.
What is oceanic crust? | The thinner, denser crust that makes up the ocean floor.
What is a convection current? | The movement of a fluid caused by a difference in temperature or density.
What is a plate margin? | The point at which two plates meet.
What is a conservative plate margin? | A plate margin where two plates are moving alongside each other.
What is a constructive plate margin? | A plate margin where two plates are moving away from each other.
What is a destructive plate margin? | A plate margin where two plates are moving towards each other.
What is subduction? | A process that occurs at a destructive plate margin when a plate is pushed below another plate, forcing it to sink into the mantle.
What is a hotspot? | An area where unusually hot magma breaks through the middle of a plate and travels up to the surface, creating a volcano.
What is a tsunami? | A large wave caused by a large amount of water being displaced when plates move.
What is a geological hazard? | A hazard caused by processes on the land.
What is an atmospheric hazard? | Hazards caused by the weather and processes in the atmosphere.
What is a hydrological hazard? | A hazard caused by the movement of water on the land.
What is climate change? | A distinct change in global or regional patterns of climate, such as changes in temperature or precipitation patterns.
What are fossil fuels? | Fuels made up of the remains of organic material, such as oil, coal and gas.
What are greenhouse gases? | Gases in the Earth's atmosphere that trap energy in the Earth's system and contribute to the greenhouse effect (carbon dioxide, methane, water vapour and nitrous oxides).
What is the Greenhouse Effect? | A natural process where greenhouse gases trap the energy from the Sun inside the Earth's atmosphere, warming the Earth's surface.
What is the Enhanced Greenhouse Effect? | A process where the Earth's surface is heated by the greenhouse effect at a higher rate due to increased greenhouse gas emissions from human activities.
What is mitigation in relation to climate change? | Reducing the causes of climate change, so that climate change slows or even stops.
What is adaptation in relation to climate change? | Responding to climate change by coming up with ways to live and cope with the effects.
What is Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS)? | The process of capturing carbon dioxide that would normally be emitted into the atmosphere and storing it underground in reservoirs.
What is atmospheric circulation? | The general movements of air around the Earth due to pressure and temperature.
What is a pressure belt? | A region of the Earth which is generally under the same pressure.
What is the Coriolis Effect? | The effect of the Earth's rotation on wind movements.
What is the Hadley Cell? | At the equator, hot moist air rises, moves to higher latitudes (30°) and sinks.
What is the Ferrel Cell? | At around 60° either side of the equator, moist air rises, and travels to lower latitudes at around 30° where it sinks, along with air travelling from the equator.
What is the Polar Cell? | At 60° north or south of the equator, moist air rises, and travels to the poles (90°), where it sinks.
What is a tropical storm? | A very large, spinning storm with high winds and torrential rain that forms in the tropics.
What is a hurricane? | A tropical storm that hits the USA, Latin America or the Caribbean.
What is a typhoon? | A tropical storm that hits India, Japan or the Philippines.
What is a cyclone? | A tropical storm that hits Oceania or Madagascar.
What is the eye of a tropical storm? | An area of a tropical storm with extremely low pressure and calm conditions.
What is the eyewall of a tropical storm? | An area of a tropical storm with the most intense, powerful winds and torrential rain.
What is a storm surge? | A rise in sea level caused when a tropical storm pushes a large amount of sea water onto the shore.
What are primary effects of a hazard? | The effects that are directly caused by the hazard itself.
What are secondary effects of a hazard? | The effects that are a result of the primary effects.
What are immediate responses to a hazard? | Actions taken as soon as the hazard happens and in its immediate aftermath (hours, days, and potentially a week or so after the event).
What are long-term responses to a hazard? | Actions taken after the immediate responses when the effects of the hazard have been minimised (weeks, months, and years after the event).
What is monitoring in relation to natural hazards? | Detecting and recording physical changes and warning signs of a hazard.
What is prediction in relation to natural hazards? | Using monitoring as well as historical trends and computer-based modelling to predict when a hazardous event may occur.
What is protection in relation to natural hazards? | Increasing the resistance of a population to natural hazards by physically designing things that will withstand natural hazards.
What is planning in relation to natural hazards? | Having systems in place, such as evacuation routes, so that if a hazardous event does occur, the population is prepared in advance.
What is the Quaternary Period? | The geological time period that started 2.6 million years ago and extends into the present.
What are Milankovitch Cycles? | The cyclical variations in the Earth's orbit around the Sun.
What is eccentricity in relation to Earth's orbit? | The changing of the orbit of the Earth around the Sun from a circular shape to an ellipse.
What is obliquity or axial tilt? | The tilt of the Earth's axis, which changes from 21.5° and 24.5°.
What is precession? | The 'wobble' of the Earth's axis.
What is an ice core? | A cylinder of ice extracted from an ice sheet or glacier, which is used to analyse past environmental conditions.
What is a marine sediment core? | A cylinder of ocean sediments removed from the ocean floor, which is used to analyse past environmental conditions.