What is the central nervous system (CNS)? | The brain and the spinal cord.
What is a receptor? | A cell or organ that recognizes the stimulus.
What is an effector? | A gland or muscle that produces a response to the stimulus to restore optimum conditions.
What is a sensory neurone? | The neurone that detects the stimulus and transmits the electrical impulse to the relay neurone located in the spinal cord.
What is a relay neurone? | The neurone that transmits electrical impulses from the sensory neurone to the motor neurone.
What is a motor neurone? | The neurone that transmits impulses from the relay neurone to the effector to produce a response.
What is a reflex arc? | The pathway of neurones involved in a reflex action.
What is a synapse? | The junction between two neurones (nerve cells).
What part of the brain is responsible for non-voluntary movement such as breathing rate and heart rate? | The medulla.
What part of the brain controls unconscious functions such as posture, balance and muscular movement? (Higher tier) | The cerebellum.
What part of the brain is responsible for controlling voluntary actions such as learning, personality and memory? (Higher tier) | The cerebrum.
What is the outer layer of the cerebrum called? (Higher tier) | The cerebral cortex.
What part of the brain regulates temperature and water balance of the body? (Higher tier) | The hypothalamus.
What is homeostasis? | The maintenance of a stable internal environment in the body despite fluctuations in internal and external conditions.
What is a negative feedback system? | A system which works to reverse the initial stimulus.
What is the endocrine system? | A chemical messenger system that releases hormones directly into the bloodstream to control metabolism, development, growth and reproduction.
What are endocrine glands? | A group of cells that are specialized in secreting chemicals (hormones) directly into the bloodstream.
What is a hormone? | A chemical messenger secreted by the endocrine glands into the bloodstream and transported to receptors on target organs.
What is the function of adrenaline? | A hormone released by the adrenal gland which increases heart rate and breathing rate (involved in fight/flight). It also raises blood sugar levels.
What does thyroxine do? | A hormone that controls the metabolic rate, the rate of glucose uptake during respiration, and promotes growth.
What hormone is responsible for increasing blood glucose by converting glycogen to glucose? | Glucagon.
What hormone decreases blood glucose levels? | Insulin.
What is Type 1 diabetes? | A condition in which the pancreas fails to produce insulin resulting in high blood sugar levels.
What is Type 2 diabetes? | A condition in which a person develops insulin resistance or doesn't produce enough insulin.
What is ADH and what does it do? (Higher tier) | A hormone secreted by the pituitary gland which increases water reabsorption in the kidney.
What gland stores and releases hormones which regulate many bodily functions? (Higher tier) | The pituitary gland.
What is the function of the kidney? (Higher tier) | The organ in the body that maintains water balance and produces urine.
What is a nephron? (Higher tier) | A kidney filtering unit.
What blood vessel provides the kidney with blood? (Higher tier) | The renal artery.
What blood vessel takes blood away from the kidney? (Higher tier) | The renal vein.
What is urine? (Higher tier) | A liquid produced by the kidneys to help maintain water balance. It contains mineral ions, water and urea.
What is osmosis? (Higher tier) | The net movement of water molecules from a region of high water concentration to a region of low water concentration across a partially permeable membrane.
What is water potential? (Higher tier) | A measure for the tendency of water to move from one area to another area. It is represented by the sign Ψ (Psi).
What is osmotic lysis? (Higher tier) | When water moves into an animal cell causing it to burst.
What is osmotic shrinking? (Higher tier) | When water moves out of an animal cell causing the cell to shrink.
What is vasoconstriction? (Higher tier) | The constriction of blood vessels.
What is vasodilation? (Higher tier) | The dilation of blood vessels.
What is the menstrual cycle? | The monthly cycle in women that involves the development of the uterus lining, ovulation, maintenance of the uterus lining and its shedding.
What does Follicle Stimulating Hormone (FSH) do? | A female reproductive hormone that is released by the pituitary gland. It is responsible for the maturation of an egg in the ovary.
What does Luteinising Hormone (LH) do? | A female reproductive hormone released by the pituitary gland that stimulates the release of an egg.
What is the function of oestrogen? | A female sex hormone produced in the ovaries that regulates the menstrual cycle and controls the development of secondary sexual characteristics.
What is the function of progesterone? | The hormone that maintains the uterus lining during the later stages of the menstrual cycle and pregnancy.
What is the function of testosterone? | The male reproductive hormone that controls sperm production and the development of the secondary sexual characteristics.
What is contraception? | Methods that are used to prevent pregnancy.
What is infertility? | The inability to reproduce after 12 months or more of unprotected sex.
What is in vitro fertilisation (IVF)? | The fertilisation of an egg using sperm outside of the body, used when a couple are having difficulty conceiving.
What is the cornea? (Higher tier) | The part of the eye that refracts light as it enters, focusing it onto the retina.
What is the iris? (Higher tier) | The part of the eye that contracts or relaxes to control the amount of light entering the eye.
What is the pupil? (Higher tier) | A hole in the centre of the iris. It changes size depending on the brightness of the light.
What is the lens? (Higher tier) | A part of the eye that further refracts light to focus it onto the retina.
What are suspensory ligaments? (Higher tier) | They attach the lens to the ciliary muscle.
What is the ciliary body? (Higher tier) | An extension of the iris. It contains the ciliary muscle which helps the eye to focus.
What is the retina? (Higher tier) | The layer at the back of the eye that contains light receptors and is sensitive to light.
What is the optic nerve? (Higher tier) | The nerve that carries impulses between the brain and the eye.
What is short-sightedness (myopia)? (Higher tier) | A defect of the eye where distant objects appear out of focus due to light rays converging in front of the retina.
What is long-sightedness (hyperopia)? (Higher tier) | A defect of the eye where distant objects appear out of focus due to light rays converging behind the retina.
What is colour blindness? (Higher tier) | A condition where a person has a defect in the receptors or a lack of receptors in the retina.
What is auxin? (Higher tier) | A plant hormone that is responsible for cell elongation.
What is ethene? (Higher tier) | A plant hormone that promotes fruit ripening.
What are gibberellins? (Higher tier) | Plant hormones that initiate germination and flowering.
What is phototropism? (Higher tier) | The growth response of a plant to unilateral light.
What is geotropism? (Higher tier) | The growth response of a plant to gravity.
What is germination? (Higher tier) | The process by which seeds develop into plants.
What is dormancy? (Higher tier) | A period of time in which seeds hibernate until they germinate.
What is parthenocarpic fruit development? (Higher tier) | The development of seedless fruit.
What is a herbicide? (Higher tier) | A type of pesticide used to kill unwanted plants (weeds).
What is tissue culture? (Higher tier) | A method of cloning plants where plants are grown in a growth medium containing many nutrients.
What are root cuttings? (Higher tier) | A method of cloning plants in which a root is cut from a parent plant and replanted in compost.
What is rooting powder? (Higher tier) | A powder that contains auxins. The cut root is dipped into this before being replanted.