What is an allele? | A version of a gene (also known as variant).
What is a chromosome? | A long, coiled molecule of DNA that carries genetic information in the form of genes.
What is DNA? | A polymer made of two strands twisted around each other forming a double helix. It contains all the genetic information.
What is a gene? | A section of DNA that codes for a specific amino acid sequence which is polymerised to make a specific protein.
What is the genome? | The entire genetic material of an organism.
What is a gamete? | Sex cells (sperm and egg cells) with half the usual number of chromosomes. They are involved in reproduction.
What is a dominant allele? | An allele that is always expressed when present. It is represented by a capital letter.
What is a recessive allele? | An allele that is only expressed if two copies are present. It is represented by a small letter.
What is meant by homozygous? | When an individual has two identical alleles of a gene e.g. bb.
What is meant by heterozygous? | When an individual has two non-identical alleles of a gene e.g. Bb.
What is a genotype? | The genetic makeup of an organism.
What is a phenotype? | The physical characteristics of an organism. It is due to interactions between the genotype and the environment.
What is meant by diploid? | When a cell has a full set of chromosomes.
What is meant by haploid? | When a cell has half the number of chromosomes.
What is a Punnett square? | A grid used to determine potential outcomes of a genetic cross.
What is single gene inheritance? | Inheritance of characteristics that are controlled by a single gene.
What is continuous variation? | Variation that can take any value between two extremes, e.g. height or weight.
What is discontinuous variation? | Variation that can only take discrete values, e.g. eye color.
What is genetic variation? | The variation in the genes of a species.
What is evolution? | A change in the inherited characteristics of a population over time, through the process of natural selection, which may result in the formation of new species.
What is natural selection? | The process by which advantageous alleles are passed down to offspring over many generations, increasing the allele frequency. These alleles give rise to phenotypes best suited to the environment.
What is extinction? | When all the members of a species have died.
What is a mutation? | A random change in DNA which increases variation. They may have a neutral, beneficial or damaging effect on the phenotype.
What is meiosis? | A form of cell division that produces gametes. They are not genetically identical and contain half the number of chromosomes.
What is asexual reproduction? | A form of reproduction that only involves a single parent and creates genetically identical offspring.
What is sexual reproduction? | Reproduction that involves the fusion of male and female gametes. This method of reproduction produces genetic variation.
What is the fossil record? | The remains or impressions of dead organisms found in rocks that are millions of years old. They provide evidence for evolution.
What is antibiotic resistance? | The ability of bacteria to become resistant to the treatment that is being used to kill them, i.e. antibiotics. This provides evidence for evolution.
What is an antibiotic? | A type of medication that helps cure bacterial disease by killing infective bacteria inside the body.
What is artificial classification? | The classification of organisms based on observable characteristics.
What is natural classification? | The classification of organisms based on their evolutionary relationships.
What is molecular phylogenetics? | Finding evolutionary relationships between organisms on the basis of their DNA. This method can only be used in fossils that have DNA present.
What is speciation? | The formation of new species due to the evolution of two reproductively separated populations. This is usually due to geographic isolation.
What is biodiversity? | The variety of different organisms living in an ecosystem.
What is a seedbank? | A place where seeds are preserved in order to preserve genetic diversity.
What is the active site? | The part of the enzyme which is specific to the substrate and has a complementary shape to it.
What are enzymes? | Biological catalysts that increase the rate of chemical reactions.
What is messenger RNA (mRNA)? | An RNA subtype that carries genetic information from the nucleus to the ribosomes during protein synthesis.
What is transcription? | The unzipping of the DNA molecule around the gene, copying it to mRNA in the nucleus.
What is translation? | Translating the mRNA sequence to an amino acid sequence during protein synthesis.
What is the nucleus? | An organelle found in most eukaryotic cells that contains the cell's genetic material and controls the activities of the cell.