What is amplitude? | The maximum displacement of a wave from its equilibrium position.
What determines the color of an object? | Which wavelengths of light reflect from it. All other wavelengths are absorbed.
What is a concave lens? | A lens that is thicker at the edges than in the centre. Parallel rays diverge when passing through.
What is a convex lens? | A lens that is thicker in the centre than at the edges. Parallel rays converge when passing through.
What is diffuse reflection? | The reflection of a wave from a rough surface that results in the wave being scattered.
What is the electromagnetic spectrum? | A group of transverse waves that cover a large range of frequencies and wavelengths. Gamma-rays have the highest frequency, radio waves have the lowest.
What are electromagnetic waves? | Transverse waves that transfer energy from source to absorber. They form a continuous spectrum and all travel at the same speed in a vacuum.
What is focal length? | The distance between the centre of a lens and its principal focus.
What is foetal scanning? | A method of producing an image of a foetus using ultrasound waves - emission, reflection and detection.
What is frequency? | The number of waves passing a given point in a second. It is the inverse of the wave's time period.
What are gamma rays used for? | Detecting and treating cancers, sterilising food and medical implements. They can cause cell damage and mutations.
What is the unit of frequency? | Hertz (Hz)
What is infrared radiation? | A type of radiation that all objects emit and absorb. Hotter objects emit more infrared in a given time.
What are infrared waves used for? | Cooking food, thermal imaging and short range communications. They can cause skin burns.
What is the law of reflection? | The angle of incidence must always equal the angle of reflection when a wave reflects.
What is a lens? | An object that forms an image through the refraction of light.
What are longitudinal waves? | Waves with oscillations that are parallel to the direction of travel/energy transfer.
What are microwaves used for? | Satellite communications and cooking food. They can cause internal heating of body cells.
What is the power of a lens? | Equal to the reciprocal of the focal length. Concave lenses have negative powers, convex lenses have positive powers.
What is the principal focus? | The point before or after a lens where light rays appear to meet.
What are radio waves used for? | Television and radio signals. They can be produced by oscillations in electrical circuits.
What is a ray diagram? | A visual representation of the path of a wave, usually around boundaries. Rays are drawn as straight lines with arrows.
What is a real image? | An image produced by light-rays physically converging. Real images can be projected onto a screen.
What is reflection? | The bouncing back of a wave at a boundary.
What is refraction? | The changing of speed and direction of a wave as it changes medium. Wavelength changes but frequency stays constant.
What are seismic waves? | Waves that are produced by earthquakes.
What is specular reflection? | The reflection of a wave from a smooth surface.
What is the speed of electromagnetic waves? | All electromagnetic waves travel at 3 × 10⁸ m/s in a vacuum.
What is time period? | The time it takes for one complete wave to pass a given point. It is the inverse of frequency.
What are transverse waves? | Waves with oscillations that are perpendicular to the direction of travel/energy transfer.
What are ultrasound waves? | Waves that have a frequency higher than 20kHz (upper limit of human hearing).
What is ultraviolet radiation used for? | Energy efficient lamps, disinfecting water, and sun tanning. It can cause cell damage, skin cancer and eye conditions.
What is a virtual image? | An image produced by apparent (not actual) divergence of light-rays. Virtual images cannot be projected onto a screen.
What is visible light? | The only electromagnetic radiation our eyes can detect. Used for fibre optic communications and photography.
What is wave velocity? | The velocity at which energy is transferred through the medium. Equal to wavelength × frequency.
What is a wave? | A process of energy transfer through oscillations, without the medium being transferred with it.
What is a wavefront? | An imaginary surface representing points of a wave that are at the same point in their cycle.
What is wavelength? | The distance from a point on one wave to the same point on the adjacent wave (peak to peak or trough to trough).
What are X-rays used for? | Medical imaging and security scanners. They can cause cell damage and mutations.